
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

KEY TO THE BUDGET DOCUMENTS
2026-2027

MINISTRY OF FINANCE

BUDGET DIVISION
KEY TO BUDGET DOCUMENTS
BUDGET 2026-2027
1. The list of Budget documents presented to the Parliament, besides the Finance
Minister’s Budget Speech, is given below:
A. Annual Financial Statement (AFS)
B. Demands for Grants (DG)
C. Finance Bill
D. Fiscal Policy Statements mandated under Fiscal Responsibility and Budget
Management (FRBM) Act, 2003
i. Macro-Economic Framework Statement
ii. Medium-Term Fiscal Policy cum Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement
E. Expenditure Budget
F. Receipt Budget
G. Expenditure Profile
H. Budget at a Glance
I. Memorandum Explaining the Provisions in the Finance Bill
J. Output Outcome Monitoring Framework
K. Key Features of Budget 2026-27
L. Implementation of Budget Announcements 2025-26
The documents shown at Serial Nos. A, B, and C are mandated by Articles 112,113
and 110 (a) of the Constitution of India respectively, while the documents at Serial No.
D (i) and (ii) are presented as per the provisions of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget
Management Act, 2003. Other documents at Serial Nos. E, F, G, H, I, J, K and L are in the
nature of explanatory statements supporting the mandated documents with narrative in
a user-friendly format suited for quick or contextual references. Hindi version of all these
documents is also presented to the Parliament. The Budget documents can be accessed
at https://www.indiabudget.gov.in/.
2.1 A brief description of the Budget documents listed above is as follows:
A. Annual Financial Statement (AFS)
The Annual Financial Statement (AFS), as mandated under Article 112, shows the
estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for 2026-27, along with
estimates for 2025-26 and actuals for the year 2024-25. The receipts and disbursements are
10
shown under three parts in which Government Accounts are kept viz., (i) The Consolidated
Fund of India, (ii) The Contingency Fund of India and (iii) The Public Account of India. The
Annual Financial Statement distinguishes the expenditure on revenue account from the
expenditure on other accounts, as mandated in the Constitution of India. The Revenue
and the Capital sections together make the Union Budget. The estimates of receipts and
expenditure included in the Annual Financial Statement are net of refunds and recoveries,
respectively.
The significance of the Consolidated Fund, the Contingency Fund and the Public
Account as well as the distinguishing features of the Revenue and the Capital portions are
briefly given below:
i. The Consolidated Fund of India (CFI) draws its existence from Article 266 of the
Constitution. All revenues received by the Government, loans raised by it, and also
receipts from recoveries of loans granted by it, together form the Consolidated
Fund of India. All expenditure of the Government is incurred from the Consolidated
Fund of India, and no amount can be drawn from the Consolidated Fund without
due authorization from the Parliament.
ii. Article 267 of the Constitution authorizes the existence of a Contingency Fund
of India, which is an imprest placed at the disposal of the President of India to
facilitate meeting of urgent unforeseen expenditure by the Government, pending
authorization from the Parliament. Parliamentary approval for such unforeseen
expenditure is obtained, ex-post-facto, and an equivalent amount is drawn from
the Consolidated Fund to recoup the Contingency Fund after such ex-post-facto
approval. The corpus of the Contingency Fund as authorized by Parliament
presently stands at ₹30,000 crore.
iii. Moneys held by Government in trust are kept in the Public Account. The Public
Account draws its existence from Article 266 (2) of the Constitution of India.
Provident Funds, Small Savings collections, receipts of Government set apart for
expenditure on specific objects such as road development, primary education,
other Reserve/Special Funds etc., are examples of moneys kept in the Public
Account.
Public Account funds do not belong to Government and have to be paid back some
time or the other to the persons and authorities who deposited them. Parliamentary
authorisation for payments from the Public Account is not required. The approval
of the Parliament is, however, obtained when amounts are withdrawn from the
Consolidated Fund and kept in the Public Account for expenditure on specific
objects (the actual expenditure on the specific object is again submitted for vote
of the Parliament for withdrawal from the Public Account for incurring expenditure
on the specific objects).
iv. The Union Budget can be structured into the part pertaining to revenue, which
is for ease of reference termed as Revenue Budget in (v) below, and the part
pertaining to Capital, which is, for ease of reference, termed as Capital Budget
in (vi) below.
11
v. Revenue Budget consists of the revenue receipts of the Government (Tax
revenues and Non-Tax revenues) and the revenue expenditure. Tax revenues
comprise proceeds of taxes and other duties levied by the Union. The estimates of
revenue receipts shown in the Annual Financial Statement take into account the
effect of various taxation proposals made in the Finance Bill. Non-tax receipts of
the Government mainly consist of interest and dividend on investments made by
the Government, fees and other receipts for services rendered by the Government.
Revenue expenditure is for the normal running of Government Departments and
for rendering of various services, making interest payments on debt, meeting
subsidies, grants in aid, etc. Broadly, the expenditure which does not result in
creation of assets for the Government of India, is treated as revenue expenditure.
All grants given to the State Governments/Union Territories and other parties
are also treated as revenue expenditure in the books of Union Government even
though some of the grants may be used for creation of capital assets by Grantee
bodies / entities.
vi. Capital Budget consists of the capital receipts and payments. The capital receipts
are loans raised by the Government (these are termed as Market Loans),
borrowings by the Government through the sale of Treasury Bills, the loans
received from foreign Governments and bodies, recoveries of loans from State
and Union Territory Governments and other parties and miscellaneous capital
Receipts etc. Capital payments consist of capital expenditure on acquisition of
assets like land, buildings, machinery, equipment, as also investments in shares,
etc., and loans and advances granted by the Central Government to the State
and the Union Territory Governments, Government companies, Corporations
and other parties.
vii. Accounting Classification
• The estimates of receipts and disbursements in the Annual Financial Statement
and of expenditure in the Demands for Grants are shown according to the
accounting classification referred to under Article 150 of the Constitution.
• The Annual Financial Statement shows, certain disbursements distinctly,
which are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India. The Constitution of
India mandates that items of expenditure such as emoluments of the President
and other expenditure relating to his office, salaries and allowances of the
Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha and the Speaker and
the Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha, salaries, allowances and pensions of
the Judges of the Supreme Court, the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India and the Central Vigilance Commission, Interest on and repayment of
loans raised by the Government and payments made to satisfy decrees of
courts etc., are charged on the Consolidated Fund and are not required to
be voted by the Parliament.
B. Demands for Grants (DG)
i. Article 113 of the Constitution mandates that the estimates of expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India included in the Annual Financial Statement and
required to be voted by the Lok Sabha be submitted in the form of Demands for
12
Grants. The Demands for Grants are presented to the Lok Sabha along with the
Annual Financial Statement. Generally, one Demand for Grant is presented in
respect of each Ministry or Department. However, more than one Demand may be
presented for a Ministry or Department depending on the nature of expenditure. In
regard to Union Territories without Legislature, a separate Demand is presented
for each of such Union Territories.
In Budget 2026-27, there are 102 Demands for Grants. Each Demand initially
gives separately the totals of (i) ‘voted’ and ‘charged’ expenditure; (ii) the ‘revenue’
and the ‘capital’ expenditure and (iii) the grand total on gross basis of the amount
of expenditure for which the Demand is presented. This is followed by the
estimates of expenditure under different major heads of account. The amounts
of recoveries and net expenditure after reducing the recoveries from the gross
expenditure are also shown. A summary of Demands for Grants is given at the
beginning of this document, while details of ‘New Service’ or ‘New Instrument of
Service’ such as, formation of a new company, undertaking or a new scheme,
etc., if any, are indicated at the end of the document.
ii. Each Demand normally includes the total provisions required for a service, that
is, provisions on account of revenue expenditure, capital expenditure, grants to
State and Union Territory Governments and loans and advances relating to the
service. Where the provision for a service is entirely for expenditure charged on
the Consolidated Fund of India, for example, Interest Payments (Demand for
Grant No. 39), a separate Appropriation, as distinct from a Demand, is presented
for that expenditure and it is not required to be voted by the Lok Sabha. Where,
however, expenditure on a service includes both ‘voted’ and ‘charged’ items of
expenditure, the latter are also included in the Demand presented for that service
but the ‘voted’ and ‘charged’ provisions are shown separately in that Demand.
C. Finance Bill
At the time of presentation of the Annual Financial Statement before the Parliament,
a Finance Bill is also presented in fulfilment of the requirement of Article 110(1)(a) of the
Constitution, detailing the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of taxes
proposed in the Budget. It also contains other provisions relating to Budget that could be
classified as Money Bill. A Finance Bill is a Money Bill as defined under the Article 110 of
the Constitution.
D. Fiscal Policy Statements mandated under FRBM Act, 2003
i. Macro-Economic Framework Statement
The Macro-Economic Framework Statement is presented to Parliament under
Section 3 of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2003
and the rules made thereunder. It contains an assessment of the growth
prospects of the economy along with the statement of underlying assumptions.
It also contains an assessment regarding the GDP growth rate, the domestic
13
economy and the stability of the external sector of the economy, fiscal balance
of the Central Government and the external sector balance of the economy.
ii. Medium-Term Fiscal Policy cum Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement
The Medium-Term Fiscal Policy Statement cum Fiscal Policy Strategy
Statement is presented to Parliament under Section 3 of the Fiscal
Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2003. It sets out the threeyear rolling targets for specific fiscal indicators in relation to GDP at market
prices, namely (i) Fiscal Deficit, (ii) Revenue Deficit, (iii) Primary Deficit (iv)
Tax Revenue (v) Non-tax Revenue and (vi) Central Government Debt. The
Statement includes the underlying assumptions, an assessment of the balance
between revenue receipts and revenue expenditure and the use of capital
receipts including market borrowings for the creation of productive assets.
It also outlines for the existing financial year, the strategic priorities of the
Government relating to taxation, expenditure, borrowings, guarantees etc.
The Statement explains how the current fiscal policies are in conformity with
sound fiscal management principles and gives the rationale for any major
deviation in key fiscal measures.
2.2 Explanatory Documents:
To facilitate a more comprehensive understanding of the major features of the Budget,
certain other explanatory documents are presented. These are briefly summarized below:
E. Expenditure Budget
The provisions made for a scheme or a programme may be spread over several
Major Heads in the Revenue and Capital sections in Demand for Grants. In the Expenditure
Budget, the estimates made for a scheme/programme are brought together and shown on a
net basis on Revenue and Capital heads at one place. Expenditure of individual Ministries/
Departments are classified under 2 broad Umbrellas (i) Centre’s Expenditures and (ii)
Transfers to States/ Union Territories (UTs). Under the Umbrella of Centre’s Expenditure
there are 3 sub-classifications (a) Establishment expenditure of the Centre (b) Central
Sector Schemes and (iii) Other Central Expenditure including those on Central Public Sector
Enterprises (CPSEs) and Autonomous Bodies.
The Umbrella of Transfers to States/UTs has 3 sub- classifications:
a. Centrally Sponsored Scheme
b. Finance Commission Grants
c. Other Grants/Loans/Transfers
To understand the objectives underlying the expenditure proposed for various
schemes and programmes in the Expenditure Budget, suitable explanatory notes are
included.
F. Receipt Budget
Details of Estimates of receipts included in the Annual Financial Statement are
contained in the document “Receipt Budget”. This document provides details of tax and
14
non-tax revenue receipts and capital receipts. It provides a statement on the arrears of tax
revenues and non-tax revenues, as mandated under the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget
Management Rules, 2004. Trend of receipts and expenditure along with deficit indicators,
statement pertaining to National Small Savings Fund (NSSF), Statement of Liabilities,
Statement of Guarantees given by the government, statements of Assets and details of
External Assistance are also included in Receipt Budget. This also includes the Statement
of Revenue Impact of Tax Incentives under the Central Tax System and lists the revenue
impact of tax incentives that are proposed by the Central Government (This was earlier
called ‘Statement of Revenue Foregone’ and brought out as a separate statement). The
statement is given as an annexure to the Receipt Budget from Budget 2016-17 onwards.
This document also shows liabilities of the Government including those on account of
securities (bonds) issued in lieu of oil and fertilizer subsidies in the past.
G. Expenditure Profile
i. This document was earlier titled Expenditure Budget - Vol-I. It has been recast
in line with the decision on Plan-Non Plan merger. It gives an aggregation of
various types of expenditure and certain other items across demands. A brief
description of the details included in the Expenditure Profile are given below:
ii. Under the present accounting and budgetary procedures, certain classes of
receipts, such as payments made by one Department to another and receipts
of capital projects or schemes, are taken in reduction of the expenditure of
the receiving Department. While the estimates of expenditure included in the
Demands for Grants are for the gross amounts, the estimates of expenditure
included in the Annual Financial Statement are net of recoveries. The document
makes certain other refinements such as netting expenditure of related receipts so
that overstatement of receipts and expenditure figures is avoided. The document
contains statements indicating major variations between BE 2025-26 and RE
2025-26 as well as between RE 2025-26 and BE 2026-27 with brief reasons.
Contributions to International bodies and estimated strength of establishment of
various Government Departments and provision thereof are shown in separate
Statements. A statement each, showing (i) Gender Budgeting (ii) Schemes for
welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and (iii) Schemes for the
Welfare of Children are also included in this document. It also has statements on
(i) the expenditure details and budget estimates regarding Autonomous Bodies
and (ii) the details of certain major Reserve funds in the Public Account etc.
iii. Scheme expenditure forms a sizeable proportion of the total expenditure of the
Central Government. Expenditure Profile gives the total provisions for each of
the Ministries / Departments grouped under the different umbrellas. Statements
showing externally aided projects are also included in the document.
15
iv. Railways is the principal departmentally run commercial undertaking of the
Government. The Budget of the Ministry of Railways and the Demands for Grants
relating to Railway expenditure are presented to the Parliament together with
the Union Budget from the financial year 2017-18 onwards. The Expenditure
Profile has a separate section on Railways to capture the salient aspects of the
demand for grants of Railways and other details of interest regarding Railways.
The total receipts and expenditure of the Railways are incorporated in the Annual
Financial Statement of the Government of India. Details of other commercially
run departmental undertakings are also shown in a statement. Expenditure is
depicted in the Expenditure Profile and Expenditure Budget, net of receipts of
the Departmental Commercial Undertakings, in order to avoid overstatement of
expenditure.
v. The receipts and expenditure of the Demands of Ministry of Defence shown in
the Annual Financial Statement are explained in greater detail in the document
Defence Services Estimates presented with the Detailed Demands for Grants of
the Ministry of Defence.
vi. The details of Grants given to bodies other than State and Union Territory
Governments are given in the statements of Grants-in-aid paid to non-Government
bodies appended to Detailed Demands for Grants of the various Ministries.
vii. The details of the Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) of the
Public Enterprises that are generated internally and /or raised by the Public
Enterprises are included on the strength of its own balance sheet during the year.
Expenditure Profile also includes the Extra Budgetary Resources (EBRs) which
relates to resources raised through ‘Government of India (GoI) fully serviced
bonds’, where the repayments/ service of both principal and interest, is met by
Government of India from the Annual Financial Statement. Statement (No. 27A)
of the Expenditure Profile, as part of proactive disclosure by the Government,
is based on Extra-Budgetary Resources (EBRs) of select commercially- run
undertakings of Government of India which are not part of Central Government
debt as per section 2(aa) (iii) of FRBM Act, 2003.
H. Budget at a Glance
i. This document shows in brief, receipts and disbursements along with broad
details of Tax revenues and other receipts. This document provides details of
resources transferred by the Central Government to State and Union Territory
Governments. This document also shows the revenue deficit, the primary deficit
and the fiscal deficit of the Central Government. The excess of Government’s
revenue expenditure over revenue receipts constitutes revenue deficit of
Government. The difference between the total expenditure of Government
by way of revenue, capital and loans net of repayments on the one hand and
revenue receipts of Government and capital receipts which are not in the nature
16
of borrowing constitutes gross fiscal deficit. Primary deficit is fiscal deficit reduced
by the interest payments.
ii. The document also includes a statement indicating the quantum and nature (share
in Central Taxes, grants/loan) of the total Resources transferred to States and
Union Territory Governments. Details of these transfers by way of share of taxes,
grants-in-aid and loans are given in Expenditure Profile (Statement No.18). Bulk
of grants and loans to States/UTs are disbursed by the Ministry of Finance and
are included in the Demand ‘Transfers to States’. Other transfers include, those
under the Demand ‘Transfer to Delhi’, ‘Transfer to Puducherry’ and ‘Transfer to
Jammu & Kashmir’. The grants and loans released to States and Union Territories
by other Ministries/ Departments are reflected in their respective Demands.
 I. Memorandum Explaining the Provisions in the Finance Bill
Finance Bill is accompanied by a Memorandum explaining the provisions to facilitate
understanding of the taxation proposals contained in the finance Bill. The provisions and their
implications are explained in the document titled Memorandum Explaining the Provisions
in the Finance Bill.
J. Output Outcome Monitoring Framework
The “Output Outcome Monitoring Framework” has clearly defined outputs and
outcomes for various Central Sector Schemes and Centrally Sponsored Schemes with
measurable indicators against them and specific targets for FY 2026-27. Output-Outcome
Monitoring Framework (OOMF) for Central Sector Schemes (CSs) and Centrally Sponsored
Schemes (CSSs) with financial outlay of ₹500 crore and more will be laid in the House
along with Budget 2026-27. With regard to CS and CSS schemes with outlay less than ₹500
crore the output-outcome monitoring framework with itemized expenditure of the schemes
is prepared by the respective Ministry/Department and the same will be presented in the
Parliament along with the Detailed Demand for Grants (DDG).
K. Key Features of Budget 2026-27
The Document is a snapshot summary of the economic vision of the Government
and the major policy initiatives in the thrust areas of the economy for growth and welfare.
Major milestones achieved in fiscal consolidation and management of the Government
finances along with a bird’s eye view of the key budget proposals for the fiscal
year 2026-27 are also included in the document.
L. Implementation of Budget Announcements 2025-26
The Document summarises the status of implementation of the announcements
made by Hon’ble Finance Minister in the Budget Speech 2025-26.

